The purpose of writing scientific papers is to communicate an idea (or set of ideas) to people who
have the ability to either carry the idea even further or make other good use of it. It is believed
that the communication of good ideas is the medium through which science progresses. Of course,
very rarely can one be sure that his idea is good and that this idea may (even only eventually)
lead to progress. Still in many cases one has some reasons to believe that his idea may be of value.

Focusing on the readers’ needs rather than on the writer’s desires
The first part of the above title seems mute at this point, yet the second part warns against an
evasive danger that may foil all good intentions: The writer is often overwhelmed by his own desires
to say certain things and neglects to ask himself what are the real needs of the reader. The following
symptoms seem related to the latter state of mind.

Having identified the key ideas in his work, the writer should first realize that the purpose of
his paper is to provide the best possible presentation of these ideas to the relevant community.
Identifying the relevant community is the second major step to be taken before starting to write.
We believe that the relevant community includes not only of the experts working in the area, but
also their current and future graduate students as well as current and future researchers that do not
have a direct access to one of the experts4 . We believe that it is best to write the paper taking one
of these less fortunate people as a model of the potential reader. Thus, the reader can be assumed
to be intelligent and have basic background in the field, but not more. A good example to keep in
mind is that of a good student at the beginning stages of graduate studies5 .

Achieving better understanding requires having relevant
information and rearranging it in new ways. Much credit is justifiably given to the rearrangement of
information (a process which requires “insight”, “creativity” and sometimes even “ingenuity”). Yet,
the evident importance of having access to relevant information is not always fully appreciated6 .
The task of gathering relevant information is being constantly frustrated by the disproportion
between the flood of information and the little time available to sorting it out. Our conclusion
is that it is the writer’s duty to do his best to help the potential readers extract the relevant
information from his paper. The writer should spend much time in writing the paper so that the
potential readers can spend much less time in the process of extracting the information relevant to
them out of the paper.7

Thus, the first thing to do before starting to write a paper is to ask what is the idea (or ideas) that
the paper is intended to communicate. An idea can be a new way of looking at objects (e.g., a
“model”), a new way of manipulating objects (i.e., a “technique”), or new facts concerning objects
(i.e., “results”). If no such idea can be identified one should reconsider whether to write the paper
at all. For the rest of this essay, we assume that the potential writer has identified an idea (or
ideas) that he wishes to communicate to other people3 .

3
How to serve the reader’s needs
In the previous section, we presented our belief that the purpose of writing a paper is to commu-
nicate a set of ideas to researchers that may find them useful. As these people are drowning in a
flood of mostly irrelevant information, it is extremely important to single out clearly the new ideas
presented in the paper. Having understood the abstract requirements, it is left to carry out this
understanding to each level of the writing process: from the overall structure of the paper, through
the structure of single paragraphs and sentences, to the choice of phrases, terms and notation. Here
are some principles which may be useful.
3.1

